docs: the very start of a team Python style guide (#1409)
canonical/operator: STYLE.md

"Flat is better than nested."

**Don't:**

```python
units = [units for app in model.apps for unit in app.units]

for current in (
    status for status in pebble.ServiceStatus if status is not pebble.ServiceStatus.ACTIVE
):
    ...
```

**Do:**

```python
units = []
for app in model.apps:
    for unit in app.units:
        units.append(unit)

for status in pebble.ServiceStatus:
    if status is pebble.ServiceStatus.ACTIVE:
        continue
    ...
```

### Compare enum values by identity

The [Enum HOWTO](https://docs.python.org/3/howto/enum.html#comparisons) says that "enum values are compared by identity", so we've decided to follow that. Note that this decision applies to regular `enum.Enum` values, not to `enum.IntEnum` or `enum.StrEnum` (the latter is only available from Python 3.11).

**Don't:**

```python
if status == pebble.ServiceStatus.ACTIVE:
    print('Running')

if status != pebble.ServiceStatus.ACTIVE:
    print('Stopped')
```

**Do:**

```python
if status is pebble.ServiceStatus.ACTIVE:
    print('Running')

if status is not pebble.ServiceStatus.ACTIVE:
    print('Stopped')
```

## Docs and docstrings

### Use British English

> [Canonical's documentation style](https://docs.ubuntu.com/styleguide/en/) is to use British spellings, and we try to follow that here. For example, "colour" rather than "color", "labelled" rather than "labeled", "serialise" rather than "serialize", and so on.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[Canonical's documentation style](https://docs.ubuntu.com/styleguide/en/) uses British spelling, which we try to follow here. For example: "colour" rather than "color", "labelled" rather than "labeled", "serialise" rather than "serialize", and so on.
```

It's a bit less clear when we're dealing with code and APIs, as those normally use US English, for example, `pytest.mark.parametrize`, and `color: #fff`.

### Spell out abbreviations

> Abbreviations and acronyms in docstrings should usually be spelled out, for example, "for example" rather than "e.g.", "that is" rather than "i.e.", "and so on" rather than "etc", and "unit testing" rather than UT.

Reviewer 2: I like `for example, "for example"`, and noticed that we could take this further (but I don't think we should):

```suggestion
Abbreviations and acronyms in docstrings should usually be spelled out, for example, "for example" rather than "e.g.". That is, "that is" rather than "i.e.", "unit testing" rather than UT, and "and so on" rather than "etc", and so on.
```

Author: Heh, your suggestion did crack me up. I'm tempted, but yeah, I think it could be a bit confusing that way.

Reviewer: Ben, you started it with "for example, \`\`for example\`\` ..."

# Ops Python style guide

This is the Python style guide we use for the Ops project. It's also the style we're converging on for other projects maintained by the Charm Tech team.

We use Ruff for formatting, and run our code through the Pyright type checker. We also try to follow [PEP 8](https://peps.python.org/pep-0008/), the official Python style guide. However, PEP 8 is fairly low-level, so in addition we've come up with the following style guidelines.

New code should follow these guidelines, unless there's a good reason not to. Sometimes existing code doesn't follow these, but we're happy for it to be updated to do so (either all at once, or as you change nearby code).

> Of course, this is just a start! We add to this list as things come up in code review; this list reflects our team decision.

Reviewer: High level comment: this reads like prose.

I wish it was:
- either prescriptive (do this)
- or as a statement (we have settled on this this / we currently do this)

Author: I tried fiddling with this text, but I somewhat disagree -- these are introductory paragraphs providing context on why we have this document. "We use Ruff" is descriptive, but Ruff (and the like) only gets you so far, hence the need for this style guide.

**Don't:**

```python
if status is pebble.ServiceStatus.ACTIVE:
    print('Running')

if status is not pebble.ServiceStatus.ACTIVE:
    print('Stopped')
```

**Do:**

```python
if status == pebble.ServiceStatus.ACTIVE:
    print('Running')

if status != pebble.ServiceStatus.ACTIVE:
    print('Stopped')
```

## Docs and docstrings

### Use British English

[Canonical's documentation style](https://docs.ubuntu.com/styleguide/en/) is to use British spellings, and we try to follow that here. For example, "colour" rather than "color", "labelled" rather than "labeled", "serialise" rather than "serialize", and so on.

It's a bit less clear when we're dealing with code and APIs, as those normally use US English, for example, `pytest.mark.parametrize`, and `color: #fff`.

### Spell out abbreviations

> Prefer spelling out abbreviations and acronyms in docstrings, for example, "for example" rather than "e.g.", "that is" rather than "i.e.", "and so on" rather than "etc", and "unit testing" rather than UT.

Reviewer: I haven't seen anyone use UT so...

I think there's a balance to be struck, e.g. "Juju RPC" instead of "jRPC" or "Juju remote procedure call" or "Juju (no JSON!) [asynchronous] remote procedure call [protocol over WebSocket]".

Reviewer: P.S. Canonical style guide already has a section on this.

How about:

```suggestion
Prefer spelling out abbreviations and acronyms in docstrings, for example, "and so on" rather than "etc." as documented in https://docs.ubuntu.com/styleguide/en/#latin-words-and-phrases
```

Reviewer 3: +1 on linking out, and avoiding the Latin is most important I think.

I do think "Juju RPC" is better than "jRPC" ... but I would use "JSON" and "RPC" still.

Author: Yeah, definitely agreed there's a balance to be struck. I've added this sentence that hopefully clarifies that intent:

> However, it's okay to use acronyms that are very well known in our domain, like HTTP or JSON or RPC.

> 

Reviewer 3: It's a bit meta to have a markdown nit in a review of a Python style guide, but could we get rid of the blank line? None of the other .md files have a leading blank line, and I think it's better not there.

Author: Fixed

# Ops Python style guide

This is the Python style guide we use for the Ops project. However, it's also the style we're converging on for other projects maintained by the Charm Tech team.

We use Ruff for formatting, and run our code through the Pyright type checker. We also try to follow [PEP 8](https://peps.python.org/pep-0008/), the official Python style guide. However, PEP 8 is fairly low-level, so in addition we've come up with the following style guidelines.

Of course, this is just a start! We add to this list as things come up in code review and we make a team decision.

**Table of contents:**

* [Simplicity](#simplicity)
* [Specific decisions](#specific-decisions)
* [Docs and docstrings](#docs-and-docstrings)

## Simplicity

> ### Avoid nested comprehensions

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
### Avoid nested generators and comprehensions
```

Author: Fixed (though "comprehensions and generator expressions")

Reviewer 3: Ha, yes, sorry. And to think I ping people about that in the "Python skills" interview all the time :blush:.

"Flat is better than nested."

**Don't:**

```python
units = [units for app in model.apps for unit in app.units]

> for current in (
> 	status for status in pebble.ServiceStatus if status is not pebble.ServiceStatus.ACTIVE
> ):
> 	...

Reviewer 2: What I ended up doing here was:
```suggestion
for current in pebble.ServiceStatus:
    if status == pebble.ServiceStatus.ACTIVE:
        continue
    ...
```
Which I think is nicer than using a comprehension at all, when the goal is just to iterate over a filtered version of something and do stuff imperatively. Or maybe we'd prefer this (jk)
```python
for status in filter(lambda status: status != ServiceStatus.ACTIVE, ServiceStatus): ...
```

Author: Nice, I like what you've written with the regular for loop and if statement. Updated.

```

**Do:**

```python

> units = []
> for app in model.apps:
> 	for unit in app.units:
> 		units.append(unit)
> 
> active_statuses = [status for status in pebble.ServiceStatus if status != pebble.ServiceStatus.ACTIVE]
> for current in active_statuses:
> 	...

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
units = []
for app in model.apps:
    for unit in app.units:
        units.append(unit)

active_statuses = [status for status in pebble.ServiceStatus if status != pebble.ServiceStatus.ACTIVE]
for current in active_statuses:
    ...
```

Reviewer 3: Spaces not tabs, as PEP8 would say :laughing:.

Author: Good catch, thanks. Fixed.

```

## Specific decisions

### Compare enum values by equality

This is six of one, half a dozen of the other, but we've decided that saying `if color == Color.RED` is nicer than `if color is Color.RED` as `==` is more typical for integer- and string-like values, and if you do use an `IntEnum` or `StrEnum` you should use `==` anyway.

> Note that the [Enum HOWTO](https://docs.python.org/3/howto/enum.html#comparisons) first says they should be compared by identity, but then shows that equality is defined too, and so kind of adds to the confusion. See also this [StackOverflow question](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/25858497/should-enum-instances-be-compared-by-identity-or-equality) and [some discussion/disagreement](https://github.com/pylint-dev/pylint/issues/5356).

Reviewer 3: It's nice to have this additional context here. Unfortunately, reading over it makes me think that `==` is the wrong choice (unless using `IntEnum`) and `is` is right. I have mixed feelings about using multiple `is` rather than `in`, but I guess it would be most consistent to have `is` there as well.

Looking over the do/don't examples, I also think that `status is pebble.ServiceStatus.ACTIVE` reads more nicely, although that's extremely subjective.

When this was discussed previously, were there any arguments (either way) that weren't included in the ones linked there?

Reviewer 2: This was only really discussed briefly when Ben and I were talking about the Pebble enum/str PR. Perhaps it's worth revisiting, but maybe I only think that since I'm mildly in favour of `is`. We use `==` everywhere currently though, so it potentially creates a bunch of busywork.

Author: Yeah, this is definitely debatable. Let's finalise this decision during daily sync today.

Reviewer 2: ```python
import enum

ZERO = 0
ONE = 1
TWO = 2

class MyEnum(enum.Enum):
    ON = 1
    OFF = 0

class MyOtherEnum(enum.Enum):
    SMALL = 1
    LARGE = 2

assert MyEnum.ON is MyEnum.ON
assert MyEnum.ON is not MyEnum.OFF
assert MyEnum.ON is not ZERO
assert MyEnum.ON is not ONE
assert MyEnum.ON is not TWO
assert MyEnum.ON is not MyOtherEnum.SMALL
assert MyEnum.ON is not MyOtherEnum.LARGE

assert MyEnum.ON == MyEnum.ON
assert MyEnum.ON != MyEnum.OFF
assert MyEnum.ON != ZERO
assert MyEnum.ON != ONE
assert MyEnum.ON != TWO
assert MyEnum.ON != MyOtherEnum.SMALL
assert MyEnum.ON != MyOtherEnum.LARGE

class MyIntEnum(enum.IntEnum):
    OFF = 0
    ON = 1

class MyOtherIntEnum(enum.IntEnum):
    SMALL = 1
    LARGE = 2

assert MyIntEnum.ON is MyIntEnum.ON
assert MyIntEnum.ON is not MyIntEnum.OFF
assert MyEnum.ON is not ZERO
assert MyEnum.ON is not ONE
assert MyEnum.ON is not TWO
assert MyIntEnum.ON is not MyOtherIntEnum.SMALL
assert MyIntEnum.ON is not MyOtherIntEnum.LARGE

assert MyIntEnum.ON == MyIntEnum.ON
assert MyIntEnum.ON != MyIntEnum.OFF
assert MyIntEnum.ON != ZERO
assert MyIntEnum.ON == ONE  # different behaviour
assert MyIntEnum.ON != TWO
assert MyIntEnum.ON == MyOtherIntEnum.SMALL  # different behaviour
assert MyIntEnum.ON != MyOtherIntEnum.LARGE
```

**Don't:**

```python

> if status is pebble.ServiceStatus.ACTIVE:
> 	print('Running')
> 
> if status is not pebble.ServiceStatus.ACTIVE:
> 	print('Stopped')

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
if status is pebble.ServiceStatus.ACTIVE:
    print('Running')

if status is not pebble.ServiceStatus.ACTIVE:
    print('Stopped')
```

```

**Do:**

```python

> if status == pebble.ServiceStatus.ACTIVE:
> 	print('Running')
> 
> if status != pebble.ServiceStatus.ACTIVE:
> 	print('Stopped')

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
if status == pebble.ServiceStatus.ACTIVE:
    print('Running')

if status != pebble.ServiceStatus.ACTIVE:
    print('Stopped')
```
